A British Perspective on the War of 1812
by Andrew Lambert
The War of 1812 has been referred to as a victorious “Second War for Independence,” and used to define Canadian
identity, but the British only remember 1812 as the year Napoleon marched to Moscow. This is not surprising. In British
eyes, the conflict with America was an annoying sideshow. The Americans had stabbed them in the back while they, the
British, were busy fighting a total war against the French Empire, directed by their most inveterate enemy. For a nation
fighting Napoleon Bonaparte, James Madison was an annoying irrelevance. Consequently the American war would be
fought with whatever money, manpower, and naval force that could be spared, no more than seven percent of the total
British military effort.
Orders in Council
War with America was a direct consequence of the Napoleonic conflict. Britain relied on a maritime economic blockade
to defeat France. When American merchants tried to exploit their neutral status to breach this blockade, the British
introduced new laws, the ‘Orders in Council’, to block this trading. In the same spirit, when British warships stopped
American merchant ships, they forcibly impressed any British sailors they found into the Royal Navy. While some of
these men were Americans, most were British. Some had deserted from the Royal Navy, a hanging offence. Britain was
in a total war with France. There would be no place for neutral traders, no amnesty for deserters. Although American
statesmen complained in public, in private they admitted that fully half of the sailors on American merchant ships were
British subjects.
Some in Britain thought the Orders in Council could be relaxed, and in fact, the Orders were suspended in June of
1812. But no one doubted Britain’s right to impress her sailors, and all blamed the Americans for employing British
seamen when the Royal Navy needed them. A decade of American complaints and economic restrictions only served to
convince the British that Jefferson and Madison were pro-French, and violently anti-British. Consequently, when America
finally declared war, she had very few friends in Britain. Many remembered the War of Independence, some had lost
fathers or brothers in the fighting; others were the sons of Loyalists driven from their homes.
Britain’s Response to the American Declaration of War
The British had no interest in fighting this war, and once it began, they had one clear goal: keep the United States from
taking any part of Canada. At the outset, they hoped that, by pointing out that the Orders in Council had been revoked,
the U.S. would suspend hostilities. Instead, President Madison demanded an end to impressment, well aware that Britain
would not make such a concession in wartime. And so Britain went to war, with no troops to spare to reinforce Canada; it
would be defended by a handful of British regulars, Native Americans, and Canadian militia.
